Introduction:
	The topic of our English class this semester has been “Steal, Sample, Remix, Mash-up, Transform: Appropriation Across Media”. For me, this has led to a personal focus on the analysis that fan culture plays on modern marketing. I chose to focus my assignments on this sub-thread throughout the course, which allowed me to explore the affordances of different modes of communication all conveying the same message. Specifically, that appropriative artistic works can effectively sell an idea.  I can support this claim by analyzing evidence from the collection of my works from this semester. Specifically, my group presentation/listicle on Dadaism, my audio tour of the Argentine appropriative artist Antonio Berni, and my artist analysis of the fashion designer Vivianne Westwood. Furthermore, in discussing these pieces, there is also the opportunity to describe the rhetorical development I've made in the course, which is a fundamental goal of the ENGL 1102 course across the department. While I have learned a lot about appropriation in this course, I argue that the most important skill I have learned is to utilize the affordances of the mode that best allows me to communicate with my audience. 
Appropriative Artwork and its Importance in Contemporary Communication:
	The overall theoretical theory about modern communication that I will take from this class is that our modern tastes are very often defined by fandoms created by multinational companies. The reason many people like science is because of the Star-Trek franchise, and many other people like televised sports because of the commercialized culture build around them. But ordinary people can actually appropriate the images these companies make, and use them to continue or even change fandoms ourselves. “Media fans do not engage with source and fantext in a vacuum, but are also cultural agents in their own right. As such, every fan creation — and its reception — filters through myriad contextual frameworks.” In those quote from Limit Play: Fan Authorship between Source Text, Intertext, and Context by Louisa Stein, we are introduced to the idea that we as consumers of the media that surround us can also change society.
Affordances Given by the Multiple Modes I Have Employed:
All of my presented artifacts demonstrate that appropriative art can be a persuasive form. However, the way in which this class presents multiple projects with similar claims to differing audiences was challenging. It very much taught what can and should be done within the confines of different media of communication. For instance, my first artifact is an audio tour that explains the work of Argentine artist Antonio Berni, who uses appropriations of American brandings to highlight the comparative poverty rampant in semi-industrialized economies. In previous composition courses, I had never before been asked to produce something outside of standard academically formatted papers. I therefore had to consider for the first time the rhetorical affordances that a museum audio tour does and does not give. For example, long elevated analysis is appropriate in an academic paper, where the reader is always free to look up difficult terms or to reread a dense passage. In an audio tour, however, it is more important to give the listener the most engaging information possible, working in analysis only where appropriate. Another challenge in this project was the addition of a children’s audio tour. An audience of small children falls even further from the general academic audience for which I was accustomed to writing. I therefore had to complete extra research on common elements in presentations that appeal to children. My group listicle on the appropriate genre Dadaism required another challenging consideration of affordances. The goal of the piece was to show what Dadaism is while appealing to Millennials so that they would share the Buzzfeed-style article on social media. Because of these limitations, my group chose to related Dadaism to internet memes. This was an appropriate choice for our mode, and made the final combination of content and presentation successful. 
Effects On My Writing Process: 
	This class has taught that in order to communicate successfully, one must consider not only the write content to make a persuasive argument, but also the most appropriate medium and mode. For example, my listicle would have never accomplished its goal of educating Millennials if it had not been shared online. Furthermore, no one would share a listicle without a popular mode such as Buzzfeed-style distribution on social media. The overall production I have leaned in this class to make effective pieces of modern communicative work is illustrated in figure one. 
I have focused my efforts in this class on becoming a better critic of appropriation. With this project, the focus of my work now has to become production. This switch is made even more difficult by my lack of artistic production. Most of my professional life has been to produce a consumable product (e.g. programming to solve problems, working in the service industry). I am intimidated by the thought of creating a work of art because I have such little experience in almost all artistic genres. I think my biggest challenge will be a lack of technical skill with photoshop, music, &c.
I do, however, feel more prepared for this project than I would have at the beginning of the course. Independent projects have allowed me to apply the academic and theoretical concepts of appropriation from the readings to my personal interests that use appropriative technique. This has allowed me to better explore an artistic exhibit that I had previously thought I understood (the work of Antonio Berni, from my audio tour), analyze a designer’s use of appropriation for profit (Vivienne Westwood’s haute couture), and explore my personal interest in art and philosophic history (the listicle that explained Dadaism through internet memes). I hope that I can use the research that I have done through these assignments to create a final product that is achievable.
	To this end, my dream artifact is to plan a Dadaist restaurant that is itself a commentary on haute cuisine. This will combine my studies of appropriation from this course, my independent research on how for-profit business can appropriate, and also my past experience in the service industry. To scale this back to the time and budget allowed, I will design a menu and two example platings. The small scale of this project allows it to be a personal project that implies my own critique of the gastronomical industry. One of my dishes will be a critique of mass-produced food, specifically of the use of addicting amount of sugar. As O'Prey points out, avant-garde itself can be thought of as a sort anti-mass-production movement, or a “'artisanal' or 'personal' mode” (2). Another one of my dishes will highlight the danger of sea pollution to our sources of seafood. This will be done by putting actual pollution into a seafood dish (think sanitized packaging floating in anchovy vichyssoise). Another dish will simply be artistically plated rice, to draw attention to famine. The lack of content in this dish is reminiscent of film artists who remove elements of a well known clip in order to highlight it (Basilico 32). Yet another possible dish could be one piece of charred pork belly served with chard and bread. This could comment on how environmentally costly it is to raise even five grams of redmeat. This plate is similar to Naomi Uman's technique of removing what is considered most desirable in her work Removed. Overall, the planning of a Dadaist restaurant will allow me to apply my own unique skills to a realistic product that incorporates the appropriative means the class has studied. 

	Avant-garde appropriative artwork has the goal of critiquing society, while design within the fashion industry has the goal of profit. Vivianne Westwood's career mixing the two began when she designed the performance outfits for the punk-rock group the Sex Pistols early in her career. The band's aggressive lyrics about discontent with the status quo certainly had the goal of critiquing society, and Vivianne Westwood took advantage of their popularity to start her first Punk-inspired clothing line, Seditionaries, in 1976 (Price p4). Seditionaries appropriated icons from anti-social activities like sexual diversion and biker culture in order to critique the preexisting popular couture culture that had arisen from electronic mass marketing (p4). Since then, Westwood has left her punk roots to appropriate designs from the history of high culture, reworked to imply contemporary societal critique, such as bringing attention to global warming, Scottish independence, and violations of habeas corpus (Studemen p1,2,5). While most haute-couture designers profit off of their clientele's need for validation, Westwood instead applies the social commentary of appropriative art to sell political hauteur (Oswald 128). Even though the look of her designs and the material that she appropriates has changed greatly, as demonstrated by her most recently released lines, all of Westwood's work is noteworthy because it markets rebellious avant-garde critique of the high-fashion industry. 
	To understand Westwood's earliest work, it is necessary to first explain punk culture, and its precedents in Dadaism. Dadaism was a movement that began following WWI and sought to criticize the role art and mass-production were playing around the turn of the century (Robertson 1). The original Dada took everyday objects and fashioned them into non-functional parodies (2). This was done with the purpose of ridiculing those who thought they could achieve any lofty goal with technology or fine art. Dadaism is avant-garde because it questions the medium that contains it. “Avant-garde art tends to be identified with its post-World War II phase of experimentation with artistic form, while its engagements with political issues in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries are forgotten” (Crow 237 as cited in Crane 123). Dadaism and even all avant-garde and is as much about social critique as it is about unconventional form (123). The original Dadaists appropriated everyday objects to create parodies of high art that imply an obvious lack of meaning and frustration with overdone interpretations of philosophy and art. An extremely well known example of classic Dadaism is Marcel Duchamp's 1917 work Fountain, which was a urinal that the artist signed, displayed in a museum, and called art. The shock value of seeing a common urinal in a museum questions the value of the entire genre of formal art exhibits, and is what makes Fountain Dadaist. Any work that appropriates seemingly illogical content to question its containing medium mimics the style of the original Dadaists. 
	Over a half century after the original Dadaists, Westwood was among the social architects who reworked Dadaism into Punk. Westwood's Punk continues the tradition of Dadaism because it deviates from expected form and appropriates shocking content in order to comment on the politics of the fashion industry itself. Punk took the mainstream culture that had been created by the introduction of electronic mass media and ridiculed it by making it violently opposite. “Punk was trash culture gone avant-garde and/or the avant-garde gone trash, and just as Dada had tried to destroy the institution of art, so the punks seemed bent on destroying the very institution of fashion” (Wilson as cited in Price 1). The dainty dresses and suave suits of the ultra-gendered 60s contrast sharply with Punk fashion. Punk critiques the overly sentimental nature of the pop culture that preceded it in the 60s by being hyper-realistic and offensive. 
	Westwood's original line from 1975 appropriates icons that are shockingly taboo and anti-mainstream, and is what labelled her as one of the influences that created punk. Figure one shows the use of sadomasochistic straps and the appropriation of leather and studs from sexually deviant culture and biker culture.  There are also design elements present that appear sloppy, such as loose fit. This is similar to the Dadaist's pseudo-random manipulation of form. “The punk look has come to be associated with clothing that has been destroyed, has been put back together, is inside out, is unfinished, or is deteriorating” (Price 2). Figure two more clearly demonstrates the non-traditional form of Westwood's work. The shirt is both stained and asymmetrical. It also brings together unusual content, including a print reminiscent of a prison-uniform, a picture of Karl Marx and Korean text. The Dadaist commentary implies that the culture of haute-couture is undesirable through the application of randomness and a lack of aesthetically pleasing form to parody society's conception of haute-couture.
	One thing that is important to understand about Westwood is that she is not associating herself with counter culture. It is more that she is expressing discontent with its opposite, mainstream culture. This is in fact congruent with other forms of appropriation. According to Metzer, the appropriation artist draws not only appropriated form, but also “the cultural associations of [the original] piece” (2). In what is perhaps her most famous piece, seen in figure one, Westwood attaches straps that are appropriated from sexual bondage (Price p3). She is not, however, selling a piece of sexual hardware. She is instead appropriating the subculture of the sexually deviant to criticize mainstream popular fashion. More specifically, Westwood appropriates sexual content because it is among the most taboo content available, and therefore serves her Dadaist goal of shock value.
	Designing for anti-societal shock value turned out to be an extremely wise market decision during the 70s. Westwood's native England at the time was economically depressed, and a comparatively liberal government and social etiquette reigned before the return of the conservative Thatcher government in the 80s (Price p2). Situations were similar abroad in the United States and continental Europe. Depressed economic conditions inspired rebel culture and enabled Westwood to establish herself as a well known brand (p2). Having a preexisting clientele was imperative for Westwood's survival of the later 80s, when the exclusivity of glamorous designs like those of Dior or Dolce and Gabbana became once again en vogue.  The branding of popular designers of this era capitalize on traditional gender roles, which is the opposite of Westwood's rebelling against tradition. Dior, one of the twentieth-century's best selling mainstream designers, only wanted to express his love for his “muse,” the female body, in design (Saisselin 112). Dolce and Gabbana, a pair of quintessential 80s designers, sold their designs by pushing psychologically aggressive body-shaming to sell their product. Well known Dolce and Gabbana advertisements include cropped images of women's breasts, women bound, and men in assertive positions over them (Oswald 131). Couture that capitalizes on affirmation of traditional gender roles juxtaposes intensely against Westwood's emphasis on selling rebellion.
	Figures three and four are two pieces from Westwood's 2015 collections. Since the 90s, Westwood has constantly modernized her brand by designing pieces that imply newer, more fashionable critique of society. This means that most of Westwood's current designs have left behind elements of punk, but continue to appropriate political statements. To this end, Westwood has been a vocal activist in the past two decade. She has shaved her head to bring attention to climate change, and even refused to open stores in new locations to reduce environmental impact. She also attached 

pins to all of her 2014 runway models to support Scottish independence and has personally spoken out against Edward Snowden's conviction (Studeman 2). As pictured in figure three, Westwood prints the slogan CLIMATE on many of her Red-Label designs in reference to the trend of environmental sustainability (Yotka p5). In figure four, the image of a woman's cleavage is appropriated and juxtaposed with a framed painting, which offers an anti-mainstream critique of the objectivization of a decontextualized part of the female body. Even though Westwood no longer designs the same punk she did thirty years ago, her fashion empire still depends on the sale of rebellious societal critique.
	Vivianne Westwood comments on her customer: “she knows herself, but doesn’t buy into mass consumerism, and takes the trouble to find out about the world she lives in” (as cited in  Studeman 3). Westwood also adds that everyone should buy more and “make it last”. The idea that one can buy into the supposedly curated worldview of Vivianne Westwood to seem lofty or critical may seem shallow, but it is an effective marketing tool. It should also be noted that even if Westwood's marketing seems disagreeable, the alternatives are her peers who sell objectification and domination of the female body. 
