[Slide 1] An enigma that emerges in Mallarmé’s poetry brought me to consider two other literary writers’ conceptions of their work, and oriented the problem toward a new perspective. 
In Mallarmé’s works variants of the word abolition recur. [Slide 2] There are many things that are abolished in his poems.
What are those things exactly – what do they symbolize? is a broad question.
Many of the things that are abolished are somewhat material: a basin, an aurora, a man, rounds of smoke, a lace, a mast, a knickknack, etc.
In this last case, [Slide 2’] in a most famous verse (“Aboli bibelot d’inanité sonore”), the knickknack is “abolished” even though it is an immaterial object, or more precisely a word (ptyx) with no referent in the material world. The master, who no longer is in the room described, has taken this immaterial object with him.
A first interpretation of this verse is: it is a verse that matters only for its sound, its sonorous materiality.
One may just pay attention to its assonances. The very perception of this verse as a wonderful sound unit turns away the reader’s attention from its meaning.
Does that mean that it has no meaning though? No, it does not. Its meaning is, on the contrary, wonderfully expressed in its materiality, or more exactly in the effect this verse has on the reader: it makes them experience the effect of an object of language that does not lead their mind towards any other object of the material world.
The first interpretation may be called isolationist, whereas the second could be called holistic. 
This two-layered interpretation reminds us that if, at first, materiality and ideality may seem in a relationship of reciprocal abolition (when one pays attention to the materiality of language, one forgets about its meaning, and vice versa); in a second consideration their relationship can also be understood as one of codependency, even though it is hard to focus on both aspects at the very same time.
This is why Jakobson says [Slide 3]: “Valéry’s formula – “the poem, a prolonged hesitation between sound and sense” – is more realistic and scientific than all the formulas of poetical isolationism.”
But why is it a poetical challenge to make the relationship between the ideality and the materiality of a same text one of codependency and not of abolition?
Let’s take an apparently simple poem as an example [Slide 4]. The one entitled “THE GYMNAST” by Francis Ponge. (I leave you some time to read it.)
What is this poem about? 
It’s about THE GYMNAST, which is what? A material object?
The naïve answer is yes. The gymnast is a body, a human being who is characterized by its body, and what its body can do.
But is there such a thing as the gymnast in the material world? No, there is a gymnast, there are gymnasts. But there is not the gymnast, which is merely an idea. An ideal object.
And THE GYMNAST is also a word (or two), a series of letters, which is above the body of the poem, and that the body of the poem describes as though it corresponded to the body of the gymnast in action… 
This device resuscitates the Cratylist myth or wish (that the word resembles the thing), but not without irony.
And though the poem is in a way Cratylist, one should observe that the discourse that the body of the text makes perceptible in its materiality is not itself, but only its title.
Another text is needed to render a text perceptible in its materiality. In this regard, the functioning of this poem is similar to the functioning of literary criticism: a discourse that emphasizes the esthetical qualities of another discourse. 
Is literature unable to demonstrate those esthetical qualities by itself? After all, isn’t that what literature is or should be: a discourse that gives a strong perception of its own esthetical qualities?
Many artistic writers were and are obsessed with the ability to give to their writings a concrete expressivity.
Ponge and Flaubert both went far into the thought of this obsession from which they suffered and reached similar conclusions. 
[Slide 5] Ponge created the formula “the rage of expression” (“la rage de l’expression”), which is the title of one of his collections of poems, and Flaubert [Slide 6] created the formula “concreted thought” (“la pensée concrétée”), which he uses in his correspondence to explain his literary endeavor.  
In a letter to his elder friend Mademoiselle Leroyer de Chantepie, Flaubert writes:
“Sublime words (that one relates in stories) were often said by simpletons. Which is by no means an argument against Art, on the contrary, because they had what makes Art itself, which is the concreted thought, a violent feeling of any kind, that has reached its last state of ideal.”
“pensée concrétée” in French is a neologism. Flaubert could have written “pensée concrétisée” (concrétisé exists in French) but he preferred “pensée concrétée”, probably to insist on the fact that the thought does not preexist its concretization, thought is produced as a concrete object.
Flaubert insists on the idea (that he strongly feels as practitioner of artistic writing) that there is no opposition between materiality and ideality; on the contrary the utter accomplishment of an idea is achieved with its perfect material realization.
In his correspondence, he often quotes lines by other writers, such as Baudelaire [Slide 7], to praise and celebrate this achievement.
Instead of abolishing the ideality, the material object that is the poem resuscitates the idea of the being, it recreates the very qualities that the being irradiates. 
It recreates the materiality of this being through the materiality of the text.
Thus we can understand the pride that Ponge shows [Slide 8] at the end of his poem “The Wasp”, when defending his poem from the attacks of future critics, he describes it as his wasp and grants to its literary style wasp-like qualities, such as inopportune, irritating, frisky, jerky.
This claim makes us read The Gymnast in a new light: the body of the text of this poem had indeed qualities that describe the gymnast, it was energetic, purposefully elegant, ceremonious.
However, one may question the newness of this mimetic effort in literature. So what exactly appeared as new to Flaubert and Ponge in their endeavors? 
For both of them, the challenge was beyond expressing an idea in its perfect material realization: they felt the need to express beings that are not themselves, that offer the resistance of their otherness. (Read quotations.) [Slide 9] [Slide 10]
Flaubert denounces the bias (le parti pris) of literary works, which makes us feel only through the subjectivity of the author, when the true challenge for the author is to express another being, for instance a Tunisian Princess from 2000 years ago. [Slide 11]
Ponge, almost a century later, echoes this ambition. [Slide 12] He uses the same expression parti pris, which is difficult to translate, to make it a claim, but he astutely invert its connotation, by making it le parti pris des choses, a committed stance on the side of things. 
The difficulty is to lose old habits of speech, the old part of oneself, to find words that leave the old habits of poetry and literature, to create an object of language that has the freshness, the newness of an old object that seems to be express rightly for the first time.   
To this project, Mallarmé himself was not indifferent, as for instance show his fans [Slide 13], poems which where written on fans, from the point of view and with the voice of the fan itself [Slide 13’].
The poem’s materiality becomes a part of a material artwork.
But ideality is not in excess. The wasp, the fan, the gymnast, the civilization from a different millennium can only be recreated in all their material texture if there are seized as a spiritual event. The spiritual event of another thing that makes an irruption inside the old and well-known realm of literature.
In this prospect, we may understand another aspect of the theme of abolition in Mallarmé’s poetry [Slide 14], as one of his poem [Slide 14’] describes the dissipation of the soul (or spirit) into the rounds of smoke of a cigar. This ethereal materiality of the smoke in movement symbolizes the dissipation of thought, as thought moves from an image to another, a sound to another, a stanza to another, to exist.  


In several works, Deleuze carefully differentiated the virtual from the possible. In her article « Actuel / virtuel » (Vocabulaire de Gilles Deleuze), Anne Sauvagnargues insists on this distinction. Their assimilation is indeed frequent, and symptomatic of a theoretical loosening. Yet, if one should not assimilate them, one should not maintain either, as she does, that the actual and the virtual are “categories that replace other couples such as intelligible vs. sensitive, essence vs. existence, possible vs. real” (22). What Deleuze asserts is remarkably and importantly different: « The virtuality of the Idea has nothing in common with a possibility. » (Différence et répétition 247). The complete absence of the notion of possibility in Deleuze’s last text on the virtual (“L’actuel et le virtuel”) could indeed make one think that the concept of virtuality gained the philosopher’s preference; and that one should stop conceiving of the virtual in terms of possibility. But many other portions of works prove that the category of possibility is far from being overrun, and support the pertinence of the relationship between virtuality and possibility; among which, one that defines chaos: “It is a void that is not a nothingness, but a virtual, containing all the possible particles and drawing all the possible forms that loom to disappear straight away, without consistency or reference, without consequences.” (Qu’est-ce que la philosophie? 111) We will argue that, instead of replacing possibility by virtuality, Deleuze worked at complicating and refining both concepts through an insistent study of their relationship.
1. Actuatlizations, or music and waffles
When we say that something is possible or not possible to what kind of thing do we refer? We can say about a song, for instance Purple Haze by Jimi Hendrix, that it was not possible to compose it in the first half of the 20th century. And we can ask ourselves, if the composition of this song was possible before 1967, before the very day, and the very instant Hendrix finished it? You may recognize here, or rather, go up to (through a virtualization), a problem that was raised and explained by Bergson, when he was asked to foreshadow what the next grand literary works would be. He famously answered: I cannot tell you, because those works are not possible yet; which startled the interviewer, who retorted: They must be possible, otherwise they could not be made. But Bergson held on, saying: They will become possible when they are made. We can go as far as to say: They will have been possible when they will be made. But to say that works that have not yet been made are already possible is a “retrospective illusion”, or in other words, a fantasy – a fantasy of a possibility as opposed to a real possibility, that emerges precisely when something becomes real, or to put it even more simply (because the expression “to become real” may retain the idea that something turns real from possible), when something is created. 
We say: when something is created and not when something is made in order to bring up another distinction that is important here: creation vs. production. We can say about a song, that it was made on that day, in the sense that it was composed on that day. But as soon as we are a little bit critical on language use, we notice that it is an abuse of language to say that a song was made as we could say of a waffle or a car. A waffle is a great example because its shape recalls us the process of its production, with a specific instrument, an instrument that seems to tell us: anytime you’re ready with some dough, I can make a waffle for you; at any time, I make waffles possible. The waffle iron who speaks in such a way, tends to forget the conditions of possibility for its own accomplishment: the collocation of the ingredients to make dough, and electricity.   
But let’s be indulgent with the waffle iron, and acknowledge that it speaks some truth. It helps us understand that to make a waffle is different from composing a song, because, apparently, there is no waffle iron for songs. When we say: we can or it is possible to make waffles, we usually mean: we have the tools and ingredients to make some, it requires no special skills when you know the recipe; we are able to make some at any given moment in time. Time is only a parameter inside the recipe: let the dough sit for one hour, let the dough cook for one minute. This hour and this minute can be any hour and any minute. In this process of production, time is neutralized: moments have no specificities and no singularity. Whereas for a song or any work of art, we can argue, that it was created at this precise moment in time, when the artist reached such specific level of skills, maturity, inspiration and gave existence to it in the contingence that is part of their existence.  
When we talk about a car, we ought to differentiate, as insurers and policemen do, the model and the make. The model requires a process of creation, whereas the make requires a process of production. The recipe for the waffle can also be considered as a work of art in the sense that it required a process of creation. Conversely, one can argue that there are waffle irons or molds for songs; and that even Jimi Hendrix (who is not Britney Spears) follows certain blues or rock n’ roll harmonic grids and pre-existing scales. Yes, but here another distinction appears to be necessary: does the musician follow grids and scales, or do they use them to create a work of art? It is obvious when you pay close attention to his composition (or even at first hearing) that Hendrix does not just follow grids and scales, he uses them to create, to offer an unheard experience of music. But could we say that Purple Haze was virtually already there in music, in musical possibilities, and that Hendrix just actualized a possibility that already existed virtually? To say that would precisely come to neutralize time and reduce creation to production, reduce an unheard music piece to a well-known waffle. 
	Let us take now a second musical example, one whose ontological status is noticeably different: Vinteuil’s sonata. The particularity of this musical piece, as you know, is that it does not really exist. It is described by Proust’s narrator and characters, and it is played several times in the work, in the fictitious world to which the work refers. But in the real world this music piece does not even exist as a composition. The compositions that real musicians created in search of this ideal object are only pretenders that will never achieve the status of being the Vinteuil’s sonata. Let’s remember Deleuze’s statement here: “The virtuality of the Idea has nothing in common with a possibility.” We can say that many different representations of the sonata are possible, in the sense that Vinteuil’s sonata does not work as a strict mold; its characteristics limit the field of possibilities, but surely not to one precise composition. What is important for us here is to understand that the adjective possible applies to the actualizations of the sonata, not to the sonata itself as an ideal object. For the sonata, it is the term virtual that is adequate; and it is precisely because it is a virtual object that many actualizations are possible. Virtuality and possibility are thus differentiated and connected. 
	Even though the relationship between Vinteuil’s sonata and its possible representatives or pretenders is different from the one between Purple Haze and its performances, and both are different from the relationship between the waffle iron and its waffles, they are all discussable in terms of a virtual object and its possible actualizations. Therefore, at a first level, it is about actualizations that the concept of possibility is pertinent, even if the word possible has a different meaning according to what type of actualization is being discussed.  
2. The Whole or the full set of possibilities and aboulia 
	At first glance, the bergsonian criticism of the notion of possibility to which Deleuze seems to adhere (at least in 1966) and the beckettian project of exhaustion that Deleuze describes (in 1992) are contradictory. According to Bergson, something becomes really possible, when it is actually created, whereas to exhaust the possible, in Beckett’s works, is to consider all the possibilities in an ensemble without preferring, and therefore actualizing any. What Beckett’s characters create is a combinatorics of possibilities. It is a strange creation. Is the word creation even appropriate here? Perhaps consideration or contemplation would fit better. So they contemplate an ideal object, which is made of all the possibilities to perform an action (for instance, all the possible orders in which one can suck a certain number of rocks), and what matters is not the action (of sucking the rocks) that would imply the actualization of a specific order, but the very contemplation of the full set of possibilities. The characters know damn well that if they perform the action they lose their beautiful ideal object for the sake of an actualization that would be no better than another. To render this palpable to the reader Beckett had to choose examples in which indeed it is obvious that one way of performing the action is not importantly better or worse than another. As Deleuze points out, Beckett’s characters suffer from aboulia, a psychological condition consisting in a lack or absence of willingness to perform actions. 
This absence of willingness concerns something that is perceived by most people as all there is: let’s call it the ordinary social life, consisting in choosing to eat a yogurt or a fruit, wearing this blue shirt or a yellow one, etc; yet the reason why they lack appetite for ordinary actions and actualizations of ordinary possibilities is that they are captivated by another activity which requires inactivity in the real world: a spiritual activity. And this spiritual activity that seems at first to be only a game for the mind, in which one feels the delectation of mentally experiencing all the possibilities of a combinatorics in a godly fashion, is paradoxically a philosophy of creation at work – or what one may call a poetics. In this perspective, when Deleuze uses the expression “to make the image” (“faire l’image”) concerning Beckett’s esthetical goal, one can hear the expression either as a litotes, or as a strong use of the verb: to make is used here to talk about the most essential and difficult act of creation. (L’épuisé 93)
This poetics was built progressively, through time and maturation, and the first act of it consists in diverting the characters or actors from realizations, to the profit of exhaustions. They do not realize or actualize a possibility, they exhaust the possible. And to do so, it is necessary that possibilities are not realized, which seems contradictory to what Bergson established about the concept of possibility. As Deleuze explains, to exhaust the possible one of the first steps undertaken is to name what is possible, “to constitute a metalanguage, a very special tongue such that the relationships between objects are identical to the relationships between words, and that words henceforth no longer propose the possible to a realization, but themselves give to the possible a reality that is proper to it, precisely exhaustable”. (66) Deleuze does not write the word here, but gathering intelligence from his other writings, it appears appropriate to refer to this reality as the virtual. That is what the developments of the book on Bergsonism surprisingly confirms. When it comes to contemplating all the possibilities or the whole of possibilities, one can only divert their spirit from actualizations and consider the virtual. Therefore, the reality of the possible (as opposed to a possible or possibility) is precisely the virtual.
Exhausting the possible is not only a happy pastime for Beckettian weirdoes, it is a privileged approach to understanding what philosophy is. In their last book together, Deleuze and Guattari repeatedly explain that philosophy, as opposed to science, does not actualize the virtual, but gives “to the virtual a consistency that is proper to it” (112). What Beckett’s characters, with their lack of appetite for actualizations, invite us to experience is precisely this consistency proper to the virtual. However, Deleuze and Guattari do not hold the combinatorics in high esteem; quoting Serres’s book on Leibniz, they distinguish two types of “infra-consciousness: the deeper one would be structured as a nondescript ensemble, a pure multiplicity or possibility in general, an aleatory mix of signs; the less deep one would be covered by combinatory schemes of this multiplicity…” (193). The combinatory approach is only a first step toward the apprehension of this consistency.  
3. Towards a typology of the virtual
	 At this stage of elaboration of their theory, Deleuze and Guattari uses possibility as a category and as a third term, by distinction to virtuality and actuality. They devote this category to the universes that art creates. “Those universes are neither virtual nor actual, they are possible, the possible as an esthetical category (“some possible, or I suffocate”), the existence of the possible, whereas events are the reality of the virtual, forms of Nature-thought which flies over all the possible universes.” (168) In this prospect, the adjective possible can intervene twice in a description of Vinteuil’s sonata: firstly, when we consider the actual music compositions that give instances of what this sonata could be in the real world; secondly, when we consider the universe of In Search for Lost Time as a work of art. This example of the use of a notion at two levels is helpful, because, to understand the relationship between virtuality and possibility, we have to consider it on several levels. 
	Firstly: we need to differentiate virtuality and possibility, understanding possibility characterizes actualizations or actualities and not the virtual.
	Secondly: we need to understand that the full set of possibilities is a virtual object; and conversely, that the virtual can be described as the whole or full set of possibilities – but that this description is not the deepest one can give. (multiplicity)
	Thirdly: we need to think of the possible as a third category, in its distinction to the virtual and the actual, a category which defines the universes created by works of art. And here the Beckett’s case is indeed interesting to consider, since he creates universes in which characters deal with the incidence of pure events (virtualities) on their physical existence. 
	That is not even all the uses Deleuze and Guattari make of possibility. We should at least add:
	A fourth use: when it comes to describing the relationship between functions and concepts. “If philosophy fundamentally needs its contemporary science, it is because science crosses ceaselessly the possibility of concepts” (153).
  	And a fifth use, perhaps the most important: when it comes to describing chaos and chaosmos. We already mentioned the definition of chaos given in What is philosophy? (“a void that is not a nothingness, but a virtual, containing all the possible particles and drawing all the possible forms that loom to disappear straight away, without consistency or reference, without consequences.” (111)) One thing that is noticeable in this definition is the use of the indefinite article a: “not a nothingness, but a virtual”; which implies that there are several types of virtual. And indeed, throughout Deleuze’s philosophy, several definitions of the virtual are given, but grossly speaking two: one in which the virtual is defined as the whole of possibilities, before any actualization; and one in which it is defined as the past. Those two definitions may appear contradictory, as the past is commonly conceived as what has been already actualized. But the past can also be conceived as a reserve of possible memories that can be linked to a present perception, and therefore as the whole of possibilities in that sense. 
	What is philosophy? does not build up on another distinction that Deleuze previously made in The Fold: in this book, the possible is not presented as a third term, but as the counterpart of the virtual: the possible is realized materially, whereas the virtual is actualized spiritually. 
	But more importantly for the problem of creation, the comparison between the books written with Guattari and the book on Leibniz enables us to observe an insistence on attempting to think the relationships between the virtual, the possible, actualizations and realizations, without diminishing the reality of creation, without reducing it to the bare actualization of pre-existing possibilities. In this prospect, Deleuze and Guattari not only defend the creativity of science (117); they also insist on the notions of experimentation and thought experience as indispensable to genuine creation. (“For sure there is as much experimentation in the form of a thought experience in philosophy and in science, and in both cases the experience can be deeply moving, as it is close from chaos. But also there is as much creation in science as in philosophy or in the arts. No creation exists without experience.” (121). What Deleuze has in mind is the experience of something that is essentially possible, which differs from what we commonly think as possible – what he calls the image or the event: “the image is deeper, because it detaches itself from its object to be a process, that is to say an event as possible, which does not even have to realize itself in a body or an object.” (L’épuisé 93) Thus it is important to understand that the relationship between the virtual and the possible is at the core of Deleuze’s philosophy, and that his conception of the possible demands an experience which is essentially philosophical: the experience of the possible that remains virtual, in its ambivalence that puts creation at stake – ambivalence between a combinatorics that needs nothing but contemplation, and a multiplicity (such as Vinteuil’s sonata or Beckett’s image) that needs to be created even though it does not need to be actualized to have consistency. 