






 
Behnke Y. /European Journal of Geography 5 4 56–66 (2014)
 
Figure 5.
Heat map (example) (Bahr, M., Frambach, T., Hofemeister, U., Lüdecke, T., Teschner, H., Wendorf, M.
2013)
A test subject’s train of vision is expressed in two different types of jpg-images and animated
in mp4-video. The train of vision is superimposed on the background image of each page (test
spread). Saccades are displayed as lines. Fixations are displayed as dots. In one form, the train of
vision is illustrated in dark blue (see fig. 6). In a second version, observance time is colour-coded
(from blue to yellow, yellow to red) and AOIs are marked in light red.
Figure 6.
Train of vision (example)
(Bahr, M., Frambach, T., Hofemeister, U., Lüdecke, T., Teschner, H., Wendorf, M. 2013)
63


 
Behnke Y. /European Journal of Geography 5 4 56–66 (2014)
 
The train of vision shows the time, quantity and the order in which the test subject passed
every single AOI. The animated mp4-file shows the path of a test subject’s eye movement over
the textbook spread in 2,4x speed.
Trains of vision depict students’ strategies for collecting and interconnecting textbook spread
information. They illustrate conclusively whether all relevant aspects of the provided information
were found on the spread or not.
 3.2.3 Data sets of recorded eye movements
The eye tracking test provided four different sets of eye movement data from every test subject:
one data set on the trial duration and three data sets on the AOIs (order of actuated AOIs,
 proportion of time in the AOIs, duration of focus in the AOI).
The trial duration data (five test spreads, three test stages) shows the time (in seconds), which
every test subject needed in order to solve the test tasks (
stage 1
 what exactly is explained on the
textbook spread,
stage 2
 completing one task from the exercise section).
Interconnected research questions were: On which textbook spread was the information most
quickly absorbed? How much time did the test subject require to comprehend the relevant
contents?
The order of actuated AOI shows in which order the test subject activated every single AOI.
Only a length of stay of over 500 ms was recorded. The data set also shows when each AOI was
actuated for the first time. The data set may show strategies of content comprehension depending
on the task: Which page element comes first and in which exact order were the AOIs activated to
collect all relevant information?
The proportion of time spent in the AOI provided a data set average for all test subjects. It
shows the distribution of time spent in every single AOI in percentage of the trial duration. An
additional data set shows the average duration of stays in seconds for every single AOI. The time
 based AOI data sets show how much time every test subject spent collecting relevant information
from every single AOI.
Research questions that arose were as follows: Are there clear correlations between the
number of AOIs activated and the results of the written evaluation? How much time did students
spend on a textbook spread, how much time exactly on which page element? Which kind of
information (photographs, graphics, and text) did students prefer solving a task or answering a
research question? Are there discernable strategy differences between secondary school students
and university students in the recorded eye tracking data?
3.3 Conclusions thus far
The eye tracking test showed that many students had difficulties to interlink complex image-text-
relations in geography textbooks in order to solve tasks from the exercise section.
The research task is now to analyse all collected data in view of content comprehension and
correlations between main areas of attention (heat maps), written test results, numerical data sets
(AOI, trial duration) and trains of vision. The recorded eye movement data are currently being
analysed.
A key aspect of geography education is working with, describing and analysing visual inputs
such as maps, photographs, diagrams and modern media as much as GIS, GPS and satellite
64
 
Behnke Y. /European Journal of Geography 5 4 56–66 (2014)
 
images as well as to relate visual input and text to each other. Acquiring and implementing visual
competencies is important to successful learning and teaching of geography. Consequently, the
ability to decode and analyse visual inputs as well as interconnecting different forms of
information (visual inputs and texts) should be trained more often.
When teachers are aware of students’ strategies for absorbing textbook information, they are
 better equipped to give targeted assistance for completing tasks or answering research questions.
The detailed analysis of all collected data and final conclusions will be published in the
dissertation.
4. CONCLUSION
The design quality in textbooks may contribute to students’ learning success. Functionality and
relevancy from the student’s perspective should be given more consideration in geography
textbook design.
In future textbook concepts, the design of visual information and the interrelationship between
visual inputs and text should be improved. Various forms of information should support one
another in greater efficacy.
Analysing and interrelating assorted visual input with text requires a capacity for abstraction
and systemic thinking. Systemic thinking is also vital to understanding complex global
relationships and should also be a factor in the conceptualization of a geography textbook. As
Lambert says: “
Thinking geographically allows young people to make connections from the
 personal to the global scale.”
 (Lambert, D. 2009:4). The guiding principle for geography
textbooks should be encapsulated in the concept of geography as it contributes to a better
understanding of the world (see Taylor, Liz. 2011).
The research results form the base for the development of design based strategies to improve
students picture text comprehension, which could be applied in geography textbooks



 
HOW TEXTBOOK DESIGN MAY INFLUENCE LEARNING WITH GEOGRAPHY TEXTBOOKS
Yvonne Behnke
55
FIGURE 10
Spread B: Order of observed AOIs while solving the task
Figure 10 depicts the order of observed AOIs. As in spread E, in spread B, the participants primarily fixated on the task. However, Figure 10 demonstrates that the largest number of fixations, from the second to the fifth fixation, were measured on text, and considerable visual attention was paid to the task, in contrast to spread E. Very little visual attention was paid to task-referred photo 68.3 and only limited visual attention was paid to graphics 68.2 and 69.1 during the first five fixations. The
 participants’ poor ratings for spread B with regard to comprehensibility (66 points,
second least) and quickly finding information for solving the task (66 points, second least) (questionnaire, Table 3) might indicate that the participants perceived some difficulties while completing the task. Further, the design of graphics 68.2 and 69.1 and the picture motif of 68.3 might ha
ve influenced the participants’
 visual attention. Additionally, the poor task outcome of spread B (35 points = 43%; Figure 4) could be induced by the high number of referred materials in task 3, and the limited visual attention that participants paid to referred visuals 68.2, 68.3 and 69.1 (Table 1, Figure 9). Consequently, it could be assumed that the more different resources are interlinked in one task, the poorer the task outcome is likely to be. However, because knowledge acquisition through visuals and text is a complex process that might be influenced by various factors, the number of depicted materials is only one possible factor amongst
others that might influence students’
 visual attention to specific textbook content.
Conclusions
Findings from the current study may verify textbook design as one crucial factor (amongst others) for successful knowledge acquisition from textbooks because how coherently a textbook layout is organised and how clearly the content of depicted visuals is designed might influence the degree of visual attention paid to textbook
024681012141618201. fixation2. fixation3. fixation4. fixation5. fixation
   N   u   m    b   e   r   o    f    f   i   x   a   t   i   o   n   s    /   2   0   p   a   r   t   i   c   i   p   a   n   t   s
Order of fixated textbook elements
TextTaskGraphic1Caption1HeadlineGraphic 2Caption2PhotoCaption Photo

 
HOW TEXTBOOK DESIGN MAY INFLUENCE LEARNING WITH GEOGRAPHY TEXTBOOKS
Yvonne Behnke
56 elements. This would be in accord with Morgan (2014) who emphasized the crucial role of well-
designed textbooks for students’ learning process
, and with LaSpina (1998) who argued that good textbook design requires the expert guidance of well-articulated layouts in which clarity and complexity are not mutually exclusive.
Furthermore, the data evaluation revealed that participants’ ra
tings for design and comprehensibility of the tested textbook spreads A
 – 
E (Table 4) corresponded in many aspects with the results of the textbook analysis from a visual communication perspective and with findings from educational psychology. Moreover, participants rated those textbook spreads best which also obtained the best results in the written task evaluation. Consequently, it might be concluded that participants were able to assess the visual quality of the examined textbook spreads A
 – 
E in relation to their effectiveness and efficacy of their individual learning process. This might be of significance, as studies suggest that subjective norms and subjective perceived self-efficacy, ease of use and usefulness are important factors for the acceptance and efficacy of educational media (Joo et al. 2014). This would be supported by the emotional design hypothesis (Mayer 2014)
and by Moreno’s
Cognitive Affective Theory of Learning with Media (CATLM), which assume that emotions, motivation and behaviour are, in addition to cognitive variables, crucial factors in learning with educational media (Park et al. 2014). Moreover, studies suggest that motivational features can improve student learning by fostering generative processing as long as the learner is not continually overloaded with extraneous processing or overly distracted from essential processing (Mayer 2014). However, though attention is one important prerequisite for comprehension processes, studies addressing the
attention-comprehension gap
have stated that attention paid to a depicted visual (graphic or photograph) does not automatically mean content comprehension (St. Amant & Meloncon 2015). Therefore, learning-effective textbook design should consider findings from pedagogical psychology, multimedia learning and information design. This would also support studies from educational psychology that emphasise the importance of the purposeful design of learning materials in relation to content and learner; a purposeful design of learning materials may support learners in understanding the meaning of the provided information (Holmqvist Olander, Brante, & Nyström 2014). Therefore, several factors should be considered, such as the clarity and coherence with which information in graphic visualisations is presented. A textbook layout that guides the learner through the depicted resources and enables the student to easily identify relevant information includes visual and textual linking between related materials, and the instructional, didactical, technical and aesthetic quality of depicted visuals (Pettersson 2015), to name only a few. Furthermore, this eye-tracking investigation revealed a disparity between the
number of visuals depicted in the analysed geography textbooks and participants’
visual attention to depicted graphics and photos on the tested geography textbook spreads A
 – 
E. Interestingly, graphics were often looked at rather superficially; exceedingly little attention was paid to the depicted photos, and a marked focus on text elements was observed. Within this context, Pintó and Amettler (2002 p. 341)
 
HOW TEXTBOOK DESIGN MAY INFLUENCE LEARNING WITH GEOGRAPHY TEXTBOOKS
Yvonne Behnke
57 stated,
“Science teachers should be aware that an image is worth
 more than thousand
words only if the reader knows the codes to interpret and to design images”. Thus, it
can be assumed that notwithstanding the omnipresence of visuals in everyday life, students face challenges while learning with images. Consequently, competencies in decoding visuals (i.e.,
visual literacy
) should be mediated more intensely and practised regularly. This might be essential for geography education, as
 
geography is inter alia defined as a visual discipline because
“
geography is unique in how it relies
on certain kinds of visualities and visual images to construct its knowledges”
(Rose 2003, p.212). Therefore, to construct knowledge from visuals in geography textbooks, visual attention to depicted materials is a crucial factor in the learning process. Particularly,
studies from pedagogical psychology reveal that knowledge acquisition through visuals and text in combination is more successful (
multimedia effect 
) than through text or images in isolation (Mayer 2009, Eitel et al. 2013).
 However, knowledge acquisition from textbooks is a complex process that may be affected by various
factors, such as previous knowledge, students’ interests, students’ learning strategies,
media specific skills and design that promotes learning (Ainsworth 2006; Schnotz et al. 2011). Therefore, further research is required. It is important to mention as a concluding remark to classify the experimental results that
the study aimed at analysing students’ visual a
ttention to depicted materials in textbooks; not in measuring learning outcome. Additionally, a number of possible limitations in the present study should be taken into account. First, only one type of graphic (infographic) was primarily evaluated. Therefore, for final conclusions and recommendations, a broader research sample is needed with a wider range of graphics (e.g., maps, diagrams, statistics). Further limitations might be found in the small sample size (
n
 = 20), the heterogeneous sample composition, the heterogeneous stimuli, the lack of a prior knowledge test, and the design of the questionnaire (only five questions). Furthermore, the research design (five textbook spreads on the same
topic) might affect participants’ attention to the depicted grap
hics. For these reasons, and based on the findings of this exploratory study utilising random sampling, a supplementary eye tracking study with a larger sample and improved research design is currently in preparation