
 Examples Base
From the Examples Base the Inducer generates the
Classification Rules Base shown in the table 4. The
Conceptual Labeler identifies the belonging of values
to the domain of attributes in Concepts Dictionary
generating the Discovered Rules Base shown in the

. Discovered Rules Base
The Knowledge Integrator analyzes the Discovered
Rules Base, verifying that there are no integration
conflicts and proceeds to integrate it to the
Knowledge Base generating the Updated Knowledge
Base shown in the Table 6. This last one becomes the
new Knowledge Base.
 Updated Knowledge Base
5. RELATED WORK
The automatic discovery of useful knowledge pieces
is a topic of growing interest in the expert systems
engineering community [45], [46], [47]. Our work
differs from those mentioned before in the proposal
of a combined mechanism for rules obtaining, using
self-organized maps based on
 
clustering and
induction algorithms. On the other hand, the
identification of the necessary processes allows the
autonomous assimilation of the knowledge pieces
generated by the expert system. Knowledge
discovery integration process models based on
connectionist models [48], [49], [50], reasoning
models based on cases [51], not expected patterns
generation models [52], genetic algorithms [53], and
technical categorization heuristics [54] have been
proposed recently in order to dispose automatic
processes for incremental improvement of the
intelligent systems response applied to the specific
problems resolution. This proposal differs from the
one mentioned above in the fact that it proposes a
knowledge discovery integration model (rules
centered) with expert systems environment,
identifying the technology needed to be used to solve
this integration.
6. FUTURE LINES OF WORK
In the different processes and how these processes
interact with the different bases, some problems have
been identified, whose solution is foreseen to work:
In the Inducer: how to use the support groups to
provide a degree of credibility (trust) to the
knowledge piece (rule) generated; in the Conceptual
Labeler: [a] define the treatment to give to attributes
values of concepts that are in the discovered rules but
not in the Concepts Dictionary that emerges from the
original Knowledge Base of the Knowledge Based
System and [b] how to rewrite the ownership to a
certain group (right part of the rule) in terms of
values of attributes of well-known concepts when the
knowledge pieces (rules) result from applying the
Inducer to the Cluster. In the Knowledge Integrator,
we should define the treatment to apply
 
when the
integration process between the rules of the
Knowledge Base and the discovered rules arise: [a]
conditions of dead point, [b] recurrent rules, [c]
redundant rules, [d] contradictory rules, and [e] rules
with conflicts of support evidence, among others. “A
priori” measures should be developed to establish the
quality of the knowledge discovery process and the
degree of integrability to the existent Knowledge
Base. The improvement of a Knowledge Base with
discovered knowledge pieces in automatic way can
lead to a degradation of the original Knowledge
Base, so it is necessary to explore (theoretically at
least) which are the curves of degradation of the
quality process of knowledge discovery identifying
border conditions for the model in the developed
theoretical frame.


 
 
20
 This process is still advancing beyond the ISO Working Group. For instance,Consumers International, the main organisation for consumers rights and mainrepresentative of the sector of civil society that ISO favoured granting it a separateconstituency, stated on its website the importance of ISO26000 as a tool toincrease accountability between consumers and business, adding that it ‘…isintended to add value and not to replace, existing inter-governmental agreementswith relevance to Social Responsibility, such as the United Nations UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights, and those adopted by the ILO’
58
. This quote is acase of the retrospective interpretations enabled by systemic closure. Previousofficial international norms as the UN Human Rights Declaration and ILOConventions, that did not originally have any connection whatsoever with aposterior notion such as social responsibility or the current initiatives of privatesocial standardisation, are re-interpreted as building blocks of a commonmovement. Moreover, this agenda previously drove the re-structuring of not onlythe departments but the discourse of the ILO itself: the main concerns of itscampaign for a ‘Fair Globalization’ are issues such as employment promotion, skillsdevelopment, sustainable enterprises and social dialogue, sidelining previousindustrial relations-oriented topics
59
. And in 2002, the labour section of GRI’sguidelines were named ‘Labour Practices & Decent Work’, in alignment with thetitle of the 1999 ILO Agenda oriented to implement the new CLS strategy
60
. Aswell, this convergence is reaching into domestic policy, where some countries,such as Denmark, are basing their national directive directly on ISO26000
61
, andmany others plan to follow by either creating compatibility documents to adapt theirlocal regulations or creating completely new norms aligned with it. The argument provided proposes that this reduction of inter-regimecompetition and enhanced compatibility with other private and publicstandardisation projects is a consequence of the politically-bargained ISO26000minimalism, outcomes difficult to conceive if ISO had maintained a closedtechnocratic stance. But normative minimalism is both a response to the increasing
58
 http://www.consumersinternational.org/our-work/social-responsibility/key-projects/promoting-csr/iso-26000/key-information(Accessed November 13th, 2010).
 
59
Seehttp://www.ilo.org/public/english/anniversary/90th/download/spfpresentation.ppt, AccessedNovember, 14
 
th
, 2010).
60
See Sustainability Reporting Guidelines, Version 3.0. Extracted October 26
th
, 2010 from:http://www.globalreporting.org/ReportingFramework/G3Guidelines/.
61
 http://www.csrgov.dk/(Accessed November 3
 
rd
, 2010). The website not only promotes the Danishstandard, but also refers to the GC, GRI, ISO 26000 and other principles and initiatives. The EClaunched its own Multi-Stakeholder forum on CSR, as well as an EU-wide business initiative underthe name of “European Alliance for CSR” (See ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sustainable-business).



 
 
21
complexity generated by the opening impulse of the reviewed ISO project, and tothe closure reflecting the system trying to be coherent with itself: in colloquialterms, ISO26000 has to be politically correct, technically legitimate and sociallyaccepted, all the three simultaneously. It was through the combination of its aim tostandardise the whole conceptual field of social responsibility, via its new andexpanded multi-stakeholder forum, and the authority of ISO within business andindustrial regulation, that the Working Group managed to convene not only themajor international interested parties but also a myriad of local ones. In this mannerit became an acting platform of global and local theorisation and socialisation, notonly of technical standard-setting. This platform constituted itself as a social and apolitical space of interaction and planning
62
: it allowed and reproduced the practiceof a language, the reflexive debate over its own institutional and discursivecontents, over its own limits and future evolution, and the critique and legitimationof the participants, independently from the publication of any text or document
63
. Inthis manner, ISO26000 accelerated closure due to facilitating systemic self-reflection: the discussion about the system by the system.
Conclusion
 This brief analysis unveils several difficulties attached to global ‘policy-making’when addressing themes beyond traditional politics and nation-state regulation. Through this case, it is suggested that socially-oriented global governance facesthe difficulty of balancing the ‘globality’ of its aims with distinct sources of legitimacy. When ISO faced this struggle, it became evident that a complicated andeven inverse relationship arose between technocratic expertise, democraticprinciples and market rationality, a relationship often assumed to be unproblematic.Such difficulties turn more evident the more encompassing a given standard
62
Planning, for Luhmann, is a specific way of producing the self-description of a system where thisself-description is oriented to the future. But planning therefore introduces further complexity andgenerated implementation and resistance at once. See Luhmann, N., 1995, p471.
Social Systems
,1984, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
63
Yates, J., Murphy, C., 2009.
The International Organization for Standardization – GlobalGovernance through voluntary consensus
, Abingdon: Routledge; Heires, M., 2008. ‘TheInternational Organization for Standardization (ISO)’,
New Political Economy
, 13, 3, 357-367;Schwartz, B., Tilling, K., 2009. “’ISO-lating’ Corporate Social Responsibility in the OrganizationalContext: a Dissenting Interpretation of ISO 26000”,
Corporate Social Responsibility andEnvironmental Management
, 16, 289-299; Castka, P., Balzarova, M., 2007. ‘A critical look onquality through CSR lenses – Key challenges stemming from the development of ISO 26000’,
International Journal of Quality and Reliability Management,
24, 7, 738-752.

 
 
22
intends to be, as is the case with the ambitious ‘triple-bottom line’ of the globalsustainability discourse, attempting to unify in a coherent and applicable discourse(liberal) economic logic, social protections and environmental concerns.Djelic & Sahlin-Andersson suggested that transnational governancemechanisms expand in part by a self-reinforcing spiral of distrust which is fuelledby three specific institutional forces: the absence of a formal authority or holder of legitimacy in the transnational arena, which must be compensated, the authorityattributed to science and technical expertise, and the demands arising from theexpansion of deliberative democracy
64
. These forces support an understanding of governance as a system of rule that is more dependent on inter-subjectivemeaning than on sanctioned constitutions or treaties
65
, which in respect to manyissues are mere statements of intention without any organisational resources orsubstance. In this sense, the legitimacy and relevance of new global policy-makinginitiatives, such as ISO26000, rest on their capacity to embed their standardisationprojects with recognised traits that make them ‘meaningful’ both locally, butspecially, globally: science is one of them, universal human values is the other.Hence, it would appear that global policy-making faces a Luhmanniandilemma of either sacrificing the effectiveness of specialisation or hamperingmaking ‘global’ sense, an unwelcomed conclusion to both technocrats andcosmopolitans promoting global solutions or global ethics. This then invitesquestioning the limitations of any non-state policy-making arrangements reluctantto agree on inclusive, albeit minimalist, principles, which reflect the politicalcompromises across different programmes, parties and scales. Alternatives to such‘politics’ of course exist: the un-democratic exclusion of certain actors fromdecision-making, the dominance of a ‘world culture’, some form of isomorphictechnical-economic hegemony or global liberalism
66
, or, as ever, force. Instances
64
Djelic, M., Sahlin-Andersson, K., 2006, p380. “Institutional dynamics in a re-ordering world”, inDjelic, M., Sahlin-Andersson, K. (Eds), 2006,
Transnational Governance – Institutional Dynamics of Regulation
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
65
Rosenau, J., 2000. “Governance, order and change in world politics” in Rosenau, J., Czempiel,E., (Eds), 2000,
Governance without Government: Order and Change in World Politics
, 1992,Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. This author doubted that any form of global governance of the issues involved in sustainable development would ever manage to achieve sufficient consensusagainst empirical findings, and balance the impact of economic development, the policies put inplace to govern them, and the demands stemming from the global discourse. See Rosenau, J.,2006, p154. “Global governance as disaggregated complexity”, in Rosenau, J., 2006,
The Study of World Politics, Volume 2: globalization and governance
, Abingdon: Routledge.
66
Meyer, J., 2000. “Globalization: Sources and Effects on National States and Societies”,
International Sociology
, 15, 2, 233-248; Tickell, A., Peck, J., 2003. “Making global rules:globalisation or neoliberalisation”, in Peck, J., Yeung, H. (Eds), 2003,
Remaking the GlobalEconomy
, London.

 
 
23
such as ISO26000 show the uncomfortable contradictions that articulating liberalpolitics with liberal economic effectiveness will certainly keep posing in the nearfuture as struggles to govern and promote values and the rule of law stretchbeyond the physical and conceptual frontiers of the nation-state.